[coughs] This is an interview with Arkadii Weisspapier.
Er, can you ask him when he was born please and where.
We'll start our interview with how, do you hear me, yes? We'll now
start our interview. Please tell, when and where were you born?
Er, I was born in '21.
I was born in 1929.
Er, in Kherson provinc.
In Kherson oblast.
There was a Kalinindorf region.
There was a Kalinindorf region.SpI Er, we had a national region.
A national region we had
You don't have to translate sentence for sentence if you want.
Village Bobrovy Kut.
The village was called Bobrovy Kut.
Can you just ask him the kind of family he comes from?
M-m.
Then, then it was in Kherson
M-m
province but now it's a locality in Nikolayev province.
M-m. At that time it was Kherson oblast', now it's Nikolayev oblast'. Please tell, but what can you remember
about your family, which was, well, your family, when you were born, when you lived there?
Well, (I) had a father, a mother.
He had a mother and a father.
Er, and I had an older brother.
I had an older brother.
And, er, a little sister.
And a small sister.
When I enlisted in the army in '39
When in 1939 I was drafted to the army,
my little sister was five years old.
my sister was five years old.
Well, all perished, father, er, I say, in.
They all died.
My brother perished at the front
My brother was killed in the battle, on the battlefield.
and the others perished in our village, all perished here.
And the rest were killed in the village, at home.
[coughs] When they were killed, you weren't there any longer?
But when they perished, you were not there, yes, you were
I, I was, er, in the army.
Of course, I was in the army, I was in the army.
M-m. Do you come from an orthodox family?
Aaa, your family was very religious?
No, not at all, not religious at all.
No, they were not orthodox at all, they were not religious at all.
Not religious. We had, well, I at least, I wasn't believing at all.
In fact I was totally unreligious.
So, your family, did they meet Jews, or did you just live with non-Jews?
Er. Your family, did it live among other Jewish families, or on its own, somehow?
Well, we lived in one house with two halve(s), we had a house, a large house.
We had one house which had two halves.
In one half lived grandpa, er, the father, er, the father, er, of my father, I say,
M-m. In one half lived a grandfather, father of my father.
and he had, er, a second wife, er, the mother of my father died in '20, there.
And he had a second wife,
Well,
because my father's
and he married.
mother died in 1920.
That's not the question. You tell that you lived in a Jewish colony, a totally Jewish one.
I said, Jewish people, Jewish people, in a Jewish region, that's how it was.
And the Jewish]
? Not our colony, but a region it was.SpNN A whole Jewish region.
The whole region was Jewish.
Er, sorry, I
But these were not such Jews like, er, not from those religious Jews, like, er, Western.
Those were not very religious Jews, not like in the Western Ukraine.
OK, about your family, we were talking about
M-m, yes, excuse me, we interrupted you, you were telling about your family.
Yes, I say, this grandpa had contacted with another wife, (she/they) had two daughters
Er, my grandfather and his second wife had two sisters
it turned out, er, me and my brother were correspondingly
one year older than my aunts, than these here.
[grins] And it turned out that my brother and I were a year older than our, er, a(u)nts.
Yes, well, now, and we lived together, all just from this large family, I alone stayed alive.
And we lived all together but of this large family I'm the only one who survived.
After the war I was alone.
After the war I remained the only one.
Because you were in the army.
Because you were at the front, yes, at that time.
Because I was at the front, then, in this hospital, I was wounded
First of all he was
and this, and
at the front, and he was in the hospital
our sanbat
because I was
got to Kiev, in Kiev, well, in this Kiev]
M-m.
Er, (we) got encircled, and I was in a hospital for prisoners of war.
M-m, аnd then
Then I was discovered as a Jew.
M-m.
And I was in the concentration camp, in Minsk.
And so
And then
You can remember, yeah?
in the concentration camp in Minsk, in Minsk I was
I know, there
in the concentration camp, yes, and it was named, at the Broad street it was, yes, there, in [?]
M-m.
Well, this was a concentration camp for Jewish prisoners of war.
Moment. Ja?
Er, so then his hospital was
You don't
taken by the Germans and he was in the hospital for pulse, then it was found out he's Jewish
and he was sent to Minsk, there was a ghetto on the Shiroka Street, the Wide Street.
Goh.
But in in '43, in August, I thinkSpT And I think in August '41
our concentration camp, and the Minsk ghetto, was deported to Sobibor, and
I understood.
and all were annihilated. Only eighty people were left, former prisoners
of war, er, to build the Nordlager, as it was called.
Moment, m-mm.
Only eighty people out of that transport to Sobibor were saved,
because they had to build the so-called Nordlager.
We built barracks, and they sort of said, that this will be a camp
for, er, repairing and sorting out of trophy weaponry, well.
And, er
Er, then we organized the uprising and escaped.
They first said us we would be building a camp and barracks to store the trophy weapons,
and after that he had an uprising and everyone ran escaped to different directions.
You said you were one year in Sobibor?
A, a month, one month.
One month, so.
You said, you were for about a month in Sobibor, yes?
Yes, for a month in all, we were brought there and they
all were destroyed, but eighty people were left well.
They brought everyone was killed and only eighty people remained.
You don't have to translate every time, it will be translated, okay?
Okay.
Okay, go on. You said you had different communities inside the camp.
But you were telling that in the camp itself there were several,
well, like communities, yes, friends in different ways.
Yes. Now, er, we with the prisoners of war, we totally
clang together all in a heap, in sum, all together
we worked in the Normlager but others were tailors, there (were) cobblers,
all kinds of, well, I don't know, what these Dutch were doing, In short,
er, I had very little contact with all these Poles and Dutch.
M-mm.
Well, now, Poles there were most of all, Polish Jews well.
Er, so he's explaining that he had very little contact to either Dutch or Polish
Jews, er, and that the prisoners of war stick together as one group, but the majority
he says were Polish er Jews, and he doesn't know what the Dutch Jews were doing,
but some were working as shoesters or some were doing clothes.
Thank you. He was together with Pechersky?
You were together with Pechersky?
Yes, well, Pechersky was for us like a leader, well, he was older than we, about
ten years, fifteen, I don't know, twelve years he was older than me, right, er,
well, and, in short, somehow, well, there was something by which we trusted him
more, we all respected him, well, and he was like a leader among us.
He was there a leader, he was older than, he was twelve or fifteen years older,
and he was very trustworthy, that's why they took him as a leader.
I was, in short, very close to him.
He was very close to him.
Well, in short, yes.
Stop. Did you meet him in Minsk or before all this?
But you met him first in Minsk or did you know him already before?
Er, in Minsk, already in Minsk. But it's true he worked in another commando, er, there was
a commando, the hospital it was called, well in the hospital, there they executed certain
works, but I worked as a docker in the Truppenwirtschaftlager, as it was called.
In Minsk he was doing different kinds of work, er, they were
doing something in the hospital and I was loading stuff.
Can he talk a little bit about Minsk, can he tell a little bit about the conditions in Minsk?
Can you tell a bit more about Minsk and about what kind of conditions there were in Minsk?
And how they were deported.
And how you were then deported from there, from Minsk.
[coughs] Well, in Minsk, well, what kind of conditions, conditions
were bad. They gave (each) a ration of bread and one time skilly.
He had little food, a piece of bread, some kind of porridge.
Well.
Conditions were bad.
But those who worked, well, those who were in the camp, who were weak and could
not get to work, died, of course. But at, work, if I worked as a docker, well
if we were loading potatoes or so, er, we would steal something
M, mmm.
Er, what was being brought in. We had gasmasks
M-m.
[?]
Each had gasmasks in a bag, and there (we would put what we stole) and bring it with us into the
camp sniffs, we brought (it) with us and there we lived in the camp, we live(d) like a family.
M-m.
We were with four people,
me, I say, from Kherson province, and them, all three were Odessites.
M-mm.
Moment.
So, the weaker ones of course died because there was not enough to eat, but those who could
work, for example I was loading sometimes potatoes, sometimes something else, and we all
had special bags for gas masks, so we would steal something, put it in these gas masks,
and then bring back to the lager, to the camp, and there were four of us, who were like
a family, there was me from Kherson, and three other guys from Odessa.
Yashka was one lame Odessite, he worked as a cleaner
M-mm.
in the camp.
M-mm. One of them was [?]
But we, the other three, worked in various jobs well.
The other three had different jobs.
And well, we brought (things) and at our coming cooked potatoes or something, in short, yes, already
We were bringing some food [?]
so that during the last period we didn't have hunger, well,
right, so, we survived. But when they brought us into this
Moment. If you talk when he is talking
[?]
it is very difficult, yeah?
Okay, I understand.
We do not delay the process. Okay, what did he say?
He said that, that when Yasha was working as a cleaner, he would often prepare food for them,
from the things they've stolen when unloading stuff, and that's how they managed to survive.
When they lined us all up, and said, Are there tailors, cobblers? Step out! Then: Who can carry
a bag of hundred eighty kilogram, step out as well. I stepped out, and then this, er, Fimka
also was dragged out and we got (there), well, but the others were seized, the others and Yashka
and this, er, they, er, were sent into the chambers, into the gas chambers.
Later, when we were brought, we were lined up, and people would be calling.
Would be
Just That, that thing, okay, put that, yeah? Sure.
Er, so
No you have to I'll show you, I'll show you.
No I just
No no no no. No no no no.
Okay, now.
Okay, you manage? And then, and then you.
This inside, and this one outside.
Ja. Er. Yeah?
Like this.
[?]
So, he was saying that they were lined up and they would ask, who is a shoemaker, who
is a tailor, and then they were asked, who can lift a bag eighty kilograms weight, until
he stood out and he took one of his former comrades, Fimka, out, and that's how they
stayed alive, and the rest of his comrades were killed in gas chamber then.
In Sobibor.
In Sobibor this happened, yes?
What?
In Sobibor this happened already, when you stepped out and drew out Fimka after you.
What, how, well, we sort of stepped out.
This was already in Sobibor? Yes?
What, what was?
Well, when they were calling you out, as a cobbler, as who can lift eighty kilogram.
When the train arrived, and (we) were lined op along the railroad cars, and they were
asking, er, Step out, they said, Are there tailors, cobblers? Yes. Step out. Then, well,
they took out these dockers, then they said, in short, Weak ones, also step out.
And the others, we were taken apart to one side, but the others to different, into these,
er, gas chambers. We didn't even know at all, by then we didn't know yet, but then (we)
asked the older camp inmates, Where are all the others of us (They answered), (Over there),
you see that smoke there, well this already is your comrades all.
It happened in[ Sobibor, when the trains came, they would be lining us up and calling others,
and then we were taken to one side, they were taken to the other side. At that point we
did not know anything, of course, and afterwards we asked the old inmates of the camp,
Where is the rest, and they showed us the smoke and said, That's the rest.
Can he tell me how he landed from Minsk in Sobibor? And there's
a moment in which he learned he had to leave Minsk.
Er, at the moment when he learned, he has to leave Minsk. M-m.
To leave Minsk, how, and when.
But do you remember how it happened, well, when you found out that you were going
to be transferred from Minsk, do you remember that moment? How did this happen? When
did they tell you, that, well, you were going to be transferred from Minsk?
[coughs] (We) were brought from the ghetto into our camp, and then loaded into railroad
cars. We were told that we were brought to Germany for work. And they loaded us, well, those
whom they had brought from the ghetto. The first train was ours, they drove it off, and
then another two trains after our one arrived as well, from the Minsk ghetto.
So
We were told, You're going to Germany to work (there).
So they were said they would be taken to Germany for work, and people from the ghettoes were deported
for the moment, and also from their camp. Er, and they were deported together. He says they were deported
in the first train and then afterwards there were two more trains with the ghetto dwellers.
And they were all killed.
Er, and they all perished? All these trains? All, who arrived?
Of course, all!
Yes, of course.
Well, these eighty people were left. Three trains from Minsk, all perished.
Three trains from Minsk and only eighty people were left.
Er, did he leave, live in a large barracks in Sobibor,
what were his conditions? Where was he staying?
M-m. But in Sobibor, when you were there, did you stay in some large sort barracks,
do you remember which were the conditions at that place, where you lived?
Well, I remember, er, bunks, and this bunk of two levels, lower and upper levels, and (made)
of planks, well, and, how we made our beds with what one had, and so, and so, er.
I remember these benches, of course.
This is considered, of course, very bad, if this is so, but we were
used (to) that, er, (nothing) better, sort of all right [grins].
Er, of course it looks very, very bad, but we were used
to it and that's why we found it was the usual way
M-m. He was healthy all the time, in Sobibor?
Er, you were not ill during the time you were there?
I, where?
In Sobibor]
In Sobibor? Sort of no. Whoever was ill, those were taken away, taken away, ill people
were not kept, they were taken away, and it was visible, to, er, the third camp as it
was called. The third camp, that was the camp, er, of destruction. And there they were
taken, into the third camp, from where there were no, (there) was no way back.
Obviously I did not, because those who were ill were taken away to the so-called third camp, and, and
no one came back, back from there. There were no ill people. If you got ill, you were taken away.
So can he tell me how he heard for the first time about the ideas of the
uprising? And if he wants to speak longer, I know a lot of the story
M-m.
so just give me short details please, okay?
Okay. Er, do you remember when for the first time you heard that there was to be some
kind of uprising? Well, when did you hear for the first time about such ideas?
How we heard? Well, it was us who organized this uprising. I was, I was
in, er, the uprising committee, I, er, together with this Sasha, together,
er, we slept together, together we knew, we prepared everything.
I was into the committee, so together with Sasha we even
slept together, and we prepared everything together.
Er, how did this committee come to exist?
M-m. Er, but how did this committee come up, for organizing the uprising?
[coughs] In short, the committee was organized, er, the organizer was Sasha
Pechersky, there was Shloymo, Shloymo, er, what was his surname?
Leon Leon]
Shloymo, forgot, well, he was in our, from Minsk. But he was a Pole! From Poland
they were deported to Minsk, er, these Po(l)es, but from the Minsk ghetto he got
to our camp, this Shloymo What the heck, well, now I forgot the surname.
You remember the surname.
Leon.
Well, so this
What?
Leon is the surname!
Shlomo Leon it was, wasn't it?
Leitman.
Ho-how?
Shlemo Leon, she's asking again for the surname? She remembers the surname, Leon.
No, Leitman it was.
Leitman.
Leitman]! Er, this Shloymo Leitman, yes, yes, Shloymo Leitman. Well, there
were brought (some) of the Polish guys, a couple of people, and I, and this
Shubaev, Shubaev from our (people). We and, of course, Sasha, well
So he speaks that, er, some of committee
And Tsybulsky also was with us.
in the committee were Polish who were first brought to Minsk and then got to Sobibor.
So they met in Minsk.
Er, yes.
This structure was created in Minsk.
Er, so it turns out that this structure and you all met each other
(when) still in Minsk? Yes, all these people, whom you named.
No, not all. Er, this Leitman, but (there) were of those elder ones, camp inmates from the Poles,
whom I even was not acquainted with. Well, I knew my own people, (but) er, the Poles I didn’t
know, I knew Leitman, I knew this Sasha Pechersky, I knew, but those, er, I didn't know.
So he knew only two of them, with whom he was in Minsk
and the other two, they were old inmates of Sobibor]
Yes, they were Polish.
and he did not know them before, he didn't know the Polish people before.
So can you talk about the preparation for the uprising?
M-m, can you tell a little bit about the preparation itself
for the uprising? How did you talk with each other?
He had to be very secret.
This, of course, was a great secret, probably?
Well, a great secret, well well, I say, the point is that
we knew, ooh, what, I altogether lost my voice.
We knew that, er, the guard was Ukrainians, in short, Polizei, but there were about twenty people,
Germans, work leaders. These Germans were armed with automatic guns, in short, armed well. But, but,
these Polizei, we knew that the Germans didn't trust them. They would go their positions, they would
give them an amount of cartridges there, but then, when they were changed, they took the cartridges
away from them. I say, thus we concluded that we had to kill the Germans. Then we just knew that around
the camp there was a minefield, I say, (we) must, er, we knew that, er, along the fence, close to
the fence there were these small German houses of theirs, where the Germans lived. So, we concluded
that probably opposite these little houses they would hardly have laid mines. I say, we, er, decided
like this: that we had to kill some more Germans, and all in a mass to (run) to this, er, passage,
straight to the Ukrainians, and, er, to cut the fence opposite the little houses. Well. And so it
turned out, that, er, some mines exploded, well, a few. Well
Moment. Sorry.
Er, so they learned that there were about twenty Germans and more Ukrainians, but the Germans were
not trusting Ukrainians, they learned that they were giving them certain amount of bullets when they
were sent out for watch and then they were taken these bullets away. That's why they decided to kill
as many as possible Germans and then to attack, er, the rest, and also they learned that there were
German houses very near to the barbwire and probably there was no mines, there were no mines there.
And so afterwards when the Germans were killed they decided to storm those direction and when they
did so, er, there were one or two mines which exploded but not too many.
I keep, keep
Oh, er, okay.
That's what he said.
Er, and, er.
And so we killed eleven Germans.
We killed eleven Germans.
And I with my helpers killed two Germans.
I killed two with my friends.
Did you ever kill before?
Did you ever have, before, at some time, to kill?
Don't you think that it is so easy to kill, moreover to kill with an axe. Er, after the killing
I went to, er, Sasha, and I say, that's it, here you are, two pistols, one I kept myself,
one I gave to him, here you are, and I was shaking all over, er, how could that be, something
horrible, er, well, after all I killed a man, that's a horror, that's
It was very terrible, it was
I don't want to talk about it.
It was very terrible of course, er, it's not simple to kill, er, to kill with an axe, and afterwards
when I, we had to kill two, when I came to Sasha, I said, here you have two guns, one I left
to myself, one I gave him, and I was all shivering a-and it was terrible, because I had to kill
a person, it was a human life and I don't want to be, to talk about it.
And he says to me, he says, You know, Frenzel is still alive, the most important one,
Frenzel is alive. I (say), You look at me, can I still do something, I said to him,
you, Sasha, look at me, can I still do something? And he says, Sit down.
And then he said me, You know that Frenzel is, is still alive, the main one, the main German.
Ja, Frenzel.
And, er, I said, Sasha, look at me, I cannot do anything more now, and he said, Okay, stay.
So he run to the fence. Thank you for telling this.
Er, thank you very much that you told about this.
It must be difficult.
Of course this is very difficult for you, thank you.
What?
Very difficult for you to tell, thank you very much that you told.
Thank you, spasibo. He run to the gate, er, with the others.
Er, during the uprising you and the others ran to the gate,
well, to that passage, where the little houses were, yes?
Yes. I, I passed through the wire, passed, well and then, I say, we went out, many
went out, out of this camp, well, but, er, well, those who were the organizers, we
had arms, we I say, I say we went for reconnaissance, for reconnaissance, when
M-m.
when Shubaev says, Shubaev says, Well, this is maybe not very moral, er, ?
case, he said, I won't go back We went away, and, he says, I won't return,
because we all will perish and, er, they will perish and we will perish.
Moment.
And he
So I
Moment, okay?
So I went through the barbwire, and then we ran away, and the group which were the organizers
of the uprising, who had weapons, we went to do some intelligence, to see what's around.
And maybe it's not they're immoral but one of us, Shubaev, he said, I'm not coming back
from this intelligence, er, I'm not coming back, I'm not returning, because I
The point is, that we for the whole night had been running, like, farther away from the camp.
And then dawn came, and we appeared to be near the camp. We had been circling around, near
the camp and we appeared to be close to the camp. And I was saying so, I went then for reconnaissance,
where to go, but then, I say, we went already not just through the woods, but along the road.
I say, we (went) so along the road, then Sasha was saying, we must walk on, not immediately
cross the Bug but walk, but we must walk to the North, because we must cross in Belarus,
not in Ukraine. And we, I say, went for the North, well, there were seven of us, and then
crossed the Bug and got straight to the partisans.
Er, so, we were running for the whole night, trying to get as far possible from Sobibor, but
at, er, the dusk it turned out, at the dawn it turned out that, er, we were near the camp
The gate.
near the camp again, we were walking in circles, for the whole night, and afterwards Sasha said that
we should not go through the woods but we should take the road, and that we have to, don't have to cross
Bug now, we have to do it in the North, in Belarus, not in Ukraine. And that's why he went North, to
Belarus, we crossed the Bug and at once got to the partisans, we joined the partisans.
Can I ask him, he was alone with Sasha at that moment? He didn't stay with the others who escaped?
But, er, well, when you went to cross the Bug, how many of you were
there, you were there, Sasha was there, was there someone else?
Seven people there were.
There were seven.
M-m, you splitted of from the big group in the woods?
You, you separated from the larger group, that was in the woods, yes?
Yes.
Was that a difficult decision, to
But well, the others crossed the Bug immediately, well, and these OUN people, er,
led them away, all one after another, they killed them off, like Germans.
M-m. And the rest, they crossed the Bug at once, and, they were killed by nationalists,
by Ukrainian nationalists, who were killing them like Germans.
How did they decide to split off with seven people, yeah?
But how did you decide, well, with this group of seven, to separate?
Well, right, this (was) not separating, we were going for reconnaissance,
and then did not return back to the general, to the general [?]
Er, we went for intelligence, and then we never came back
to the main group. So that's how we split it up.
You decided.
They, they decided to go to see what's around and never came back.
M-m. They really decided not to come back?
? I don't remember, either seven or nine.
You, well, from these then, did you decide then, that you
wouldn't return, or did it just turn out like that?
Well, it turned out like that, this Shubaev was saying, back we won't return, because
we all perish. We must cross the Bug faster, and get to the partisans, right.
It turned out so and, and Shubaev was saying all the time, that we are not coming back, because
then we're all dead, and we have to cross the Bug and join the partisans as quick as we can.
[cough]
Thank you ve
We got into this, well, right, the Frunze detachment, so it was called.
We joined er partisan, er, group
And they
called Frunze group.
I say, they said so, about three days we were there, er, he says, they
of course did not kill (us), like in Ukraine, they said, Go east, cross
the front, you cross, and join the army. But we don't need Jews.
And we stayed for about three days with that partisan group, they of course
were not killing us like it happened in Ukraine, but they said, You go east,
you cross the frontline and you join the army. We do not need Jews here.
Well. We headed.
That, that must have been a shock.
We headed east, and the reconnaissance of this detachment
encircled us took our arms from us, and went away.
And then, er, when we went eastwards, the intelligence groups of the those partisans took
Pistols.
away our weapons, and left.
Were they Polish partisans or Russian partisans [?]. Russian partisans.
M-m.
They took away your weapons?
They took away all arms from you?
All arms, they took everything from us.
Yes they took everything from us [?].
And, er, we went farther. But we got to the transport unit of this Stalin brigade.
M-m
And they needed, er, these [?нездабрые?]. And they seated us on a cart,
and with this transport unit we got to the brigade, the Stalin brigade.
Er.
And there, I say, we got to this Stalin brigade, and there they separated us. Sasha and yet another
one, Naum, he was, er, ? from ? And he was a butcher, so they took him immediately into this, er,
transport unit, well. In turn them two, er, they left them in the Shchors detachment. But in the
Shchors detachment was a Jewish, er, Jewish, er, not a company but a unit, a Jewish one.
Moment.
M-m. Ah, so when they were walking afterwards they got to the rear transport of the Stalin brigade,
so-called, and that rear brigade they had, they needed help. So they took them, with that rear
unions they got to the main brigade and that's were they got separated, because
But us, the others
Moment, moment! Who got separated?
Er, this group of, of seven people.
Ja, with different people.
Yes, yes. Er, Sasha, and another person, er, they were taken to the
Stalin brigade, and the rest to the Shchors partisan brigade.
But us, the others, five people, we were sent back to that! To the Frunze detachment,
and we, er, showed up, I say, Take us into the partisans, and, well, clearly, we fought
rather well afterwards. I was at first a second-number machine gunner, but when (we)
united with the army I was commander of a machine-gun section, right-o.
Moment.
Er, so, they got separated, Sasha and the second guy, they went to this, er, Frunze brigade, which
had a Jewish union, and the rest of five, they were sent back to that, er, Frunze brigade.
Yeah.
Er, but with an order now to take them as partisans. So, er, and afterwards, he
says, they were good fighters, he was at first a second-number machine gun, and
then, when they joined the army, he was the commander of a machine gun union.
I do want to finish for today, but I have one question, can you say that?
Er, we and you, we will soon finish already, probably, for today,
but there is still one question to you. A final question.
And then tomorrow I want to talk about after the war.
But, tomorrow we will talk with you about what was after the war.
I don't want him to get too tired.
We don't want that you get very tired, that it is not hard for you.
Er, er.
There is a story, he tried to escape.
I have a partisan booklet, this, a partisan’s certificate.
I have a partisan passport.
I have a, er, partisan of Belarus.
Passport of Belorussian partisan.
I want, er, there's a story, which I want to tell him. And I want him to reply to that. It
is (the) story that he tried to escape with a group of men before the uprising. Yes.
M-m.
And he was forbidden to do so.
Can he tell me if the story is true or not.
M-m. Er, well, when she read about Sobibor, yes, she, er, found a story,
in which it was said that you and a few other people wanted to escape before
the uprising, but you were forbidden to. Is this true, or is this
No, I say, it was like this. We wanted (to get) through this wire, get through [?]
Er, well, right, of course they forbade us, they said that an uprising is being prepared,
and you won't escape, er, separately, there wasn't something like that.
Yes, the story is
Well, but no, well, er, this was only talks. Not any preparations, well, (no) reconnaissance, there was
nothing at all. These were talks, talks, well, well, a few people, us, they found out, Sasha found out,
and he said, er, he sent for (us) and said, Don't do that, we will an, er, overall escape.
M-m. But is was only talk, we never did anything to prepare it for real, we were just
talking that we should go under the barbwire and escape, and when Sasha heard about that
he called us and said that you mustn't do it because there is big uprising and if you
try it you won't escape and you won't let others escape too because of you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, thank you.
It was just necessary to check the microphone.
[coughs]
Hello.
[laughs]
We hear you talking. Er, we had stopped yesterday, that you were joining the partisans.
Yesterday we finished on the point where you joined the partisans
Yes.
after the war.
Er, would you please talk about how you found the partisans and how it was to be with them?
Can you tell a little bit about, well, how you joined this partisan detachment and how, er,
which events happened there, how you felt, during participation in the partisan struggle.
Well that, er well, at first, they would not take us at all into this detachment. But then from,
er, the Stalin brigade they sent us that way, and, er, I for example, was appointed second-number
machine gunner. Right. I participated in several events, we, er, with our machine gun, we went
to a region of Ukraine to prepare provisions [grins] for our detachment, well [coughs]. Er, already
within a couple of months there was an offensive, er, by the Polizei and the Germans into our region,
so we, er, took the defence and our machine gun distinguished itself well on that (occasion), and
after this I was appointed commander of the machine-gun section.
Moment.
Er, so at first he was, he was saying, he was not taken by the partisans, but then for the second
time, when there was an order from the Stalin brigade, so to say, er, they were taken into the partisan
union and, er, he was, er, second number machine gun. They had different things going on, they went,
er, to Ukraine, for example to, to get foods for the partisan group. And also, in some months, the
Germans and the police started attacking the region where the group was, and they had, er, better
events with that Germans at, and his machine gun was taking, er, good care of that, so that afterwards
he was given the rank of commander of the machine gun union.
Was it still important he was a Jew?
But did it play a role up to that time that you were a Jew?
I don't think, but, yes, er, when they already accepted us, we (were) just like
all, there was not any animosity, we didn't feel (any), in this detachment. Well,
er, right, we were not, we were all experienced soldiers. We all participated
in the war and endured a lot and we were not, how to say, er, like
I
not like, er, newcomers, knowing nothing at all, yet, we were experienced
soldiers, and therefore the disposition to us was like that
When we were taken into the union we were like anyone else, it did not match
any more that we were Jewish, and also we were not young, we were soldiers, who
had lots of experience, and that's why we also were taken back to them
Could he talk about his experience? In Sobibor? Or did he never talk about it.
But could you at that time talk about what had happened in Sobibor,
or did you not mention it? While you were among the partisans.
I'll tell you, no, no one was particularly interested. Not interested. Er, perhaps Sasha, er,
was close to the leadership of this Stalin brigade, and he began immediately to take up contact
with Ehrenburg and with others, Sasha began, and that would be for some(one) else. We lost contact
with him, when we were already in this Frunze (detachment). He and I didn't keep in touch any
more. And only already after the war we found each other again. He was occupied with these things,
er, still from the partisans he contacted Ehrenburg and others, and told about, er, Sobibor.
And there even appeared an article in, I think, the Komsomolskaya Pravda, about this, about
the uprising in Sobibor, still before we joined the army.
M-m.
Er, so, no one was pretty much interested in what happened in Sobibor, and I did not talk much so no
one was asking, er, but Sasha, who was closer to the Stalin brigade authorities, went into contact with
Ehrenburg and others, other people who were interested, and he talked much to them, because, er, when
I went to Frunze to the partisans and he was at Stalin brigade we lost touch, and er, we rejoined only
after the war. But during that time he was making contacts and even one of the articles on Sobibor uprising
appeared probably in Komsomolskaya Pravda newspaper, er, still during the war.
Oh really, I didn't know that.
Because Sasha was pressing much.
Er, and can you talk ? about your time in, as a partisan?
Did you stay in the same region, did you move?
M-m. When you were among the partisans, did you stay in
one region, did you move around, how did it happen?
We were basically in our own region. We were basically in our own region. Only when our troops already
occupied Western Ukraine, and our people and Belarus were (being) liberated, er, there was a big offensive
of German troops towards our region and we were moving around, in short, retreating, all the time,
and then crossed the border of Ukraine and joined the army in Ukraine. I say, we retreated from our
region and the front, the front settled on the border of Ukraine with Belarus.
We mostly stayed at our own region, er, but then later, when the Soviet army came, they
first liberated Western Ukraine and the Belarus was not yet liberated. And the Germans
started a big attack and then we had to retreat and retreat, and we joined the army in
Ukraine, and then the border between the German occupation and the Soviet army was approximately
the Ukrainian border. And at that border they joined the regular army.
M-m. Okay, and then?
But then what happened, when you joined the army?
Well, we joined, er, our units were disbanded and handed over to, er, units of the army.
I got into, er, a machine-gun battalion, (there) was a battalion, and then, I say, er, into a training
company, and then they left me training machine gunners. I hang around there, how to say, in short, a
couple of months, I was teaching machine gunners, in the army, but then I got (involved) in forcing,
already got (involved) in, in forward position got (involved) in forcing the Oder, the Oder.
M-m.
So, when we joined the army the partisan union was totally reformed, the people were sent to different
units of the regular army. I was sent to a machine gun battalion, where I was for some time, then
for several months I was teaching young soldiers to use the machine gun. And afterwards I went to
the front and I was taking part in the liberation of Oder, the Oder, in forcing the Oder.
Order?
The river, the river.
OK, and then you crossed the Oder?
And then you crossed the Oder?
Well, yes, of course
Of course.
I finished, er, the war in Wismar.
I understand.
Yes.
Er, and did he participate in the liberation of Jews and Jewish camps?
But did you somehow participate in the liberation of Jewish camps, or did you see any Jews?
No, I didn't come across. I think, er, I think by then I didn't even know that there
were Jewish camps, I think we thought they had all been annihilated already.
N-n-no, I met no one, and I didn't even know that the Jewish camps
exist, we thought that everyone was killed by that time.
M-m.
the camps were annihilated.
What does he say?
He is saying that he means that the camps were destroyed.
Yes, I understood already, yes, er, I can, that you can see here between the lines.
M-m.
Er, so, was it a hard life in the Russian army, was it we hear stories it was a very
hard life, was it hard in the partisans, was it hard in the army, can you compare?
M-m, well, if you compare, was it harder with the partisans, or harder
in the army? Because, well, she has heard that, well, in the army it was
very hard, in the Russian, but well, if you compare how you felt.
It was hard in captivity. Er, in the army it was like this as it was
for all and, of course, serving there was hard. But it cannot be compared
with captivity, er, let alone with the concentration camp.
It was hard in captivity not in the army, and er, in the army it was like for everyone
and you cannot compare it to the captivity or to the concentration camp.
Please tell him that I do understand he assumed that people
were killed, that I understand, that I really understand.
M-m.
Please tell him.
She understands, well, what you said, that you thought that all had
already long, all camps had already long ago been annihilated
Yes.
and that the people had perished already. She understands this well.
I understand why he couldn't believe that people had survived [?].
And why it was so difficult to believe that someone still survived
after the Germans, that someone had stayed alive.
Tell him.
Well, we thought that we were left over by accident, this [?траки?] there is, we didn't even
think that so many had stayed alive, I thought these seven people with whom we were, (that's it),
but still there were probably left some fifty or more people, saved from, er, from the camp. Many,
many already perished in Poland, quite a lot were killed by Poles, and many got
to Ukraine and they were killed after this, well er, in short, er, there
was such such a feeling that, wherever we get, we don't belong there.
We also thought that we were the only seven who survived and that everyone else was killed,
pretty much by chance that the seven of us survived, I only later got to know that there were
more people who, who survived, like about thirty, a, or fifty, and then, some were killed
by Poles, some got the Ukraine were killed, and many were killed during the war. But whenever,
whenever we went, we felt we're not, er, we're others. We're different.
And alone, I assume.
And, and probably lonely, yes, not just strangers, but also loners, she thinks.
No, just strangers.
Nu, rather enemies than lonely.
Loners, m-m.
The strangers.
Strangers, yes. Yes. So where was he when the war ended?
Where were you when the war ended?
When the war was coming to its end, we were stationed in Wismar.
In Wismar, Wismar he was when the war ended.
And then?
sighs Er, then? What then, I already don't remember where we went
after that. Mmmm, where were we stationed in the final period
He can't remember the place.
Well I was, er, sergeant major of the company, in the final period, well, and then we were separated,
those from (19)21 and older, I say, were liable to the first demobilization, well, so (they) almost
didn't participate in instruction. There we fulfilled our duties, I was given an assistant, er, as a
sergeant major, I introduced him to the current affairs, well, to the work of a company's sergeant major,
well and so, (a few) months, some six months perhaps, until we, er, were demobilized.
So, I was head of compartment, and for about six months we stayed somewhere
around, we had to fulfil our functions, I had an accomplice whom I had to teach
what and where, and then everyone who was born in 1921 or before
Basically
were demobilized.
Basically, basically we were busy with instructing the reinforcements that came, er,
'27, 1927 was drafted and we kept ourselves busy with, er, instructing them.
We mostly had to teach the newcomers, born in 1927, and then, er, as I
said, they had to be all demobilized, because they were old enough.
M-m, and where did you go?
When?
After he was demobilized.
M-m. And where did you go after the demobilization?
sighs I didn't know, didn't know where to go.
Didn't know where to go.
Such was ? the time. Still when a partisan I sent a letter to our village and received an
answer that all those near to me had perished, and, er, I knew that I had no one. I came,
came to my village when I was demobilized, well but there I found out that in Zaporozhe
lived cousins of my father. Cousins
M-m.
of my father. Well, and I went that way, found out about their address, went to them. Er, on the
whole they very much loved my father, I say, er, these, er, maternal cousins. Well And They wanted
to get me as a teacher in the village, in ours. I had finished ten-year school with distinction,
I was, in short, I had studied well, right but then I consulted my father's cousin and I say that
I will work as a tutor and want to go to college. To study. But I didn't have any documents. Neither
this, nor that (document) on having finished ten-year school and everything. This cousin had graduated
from a teacher training college in Zaporozhe. He went to the rector and said, Look, my relative
was in the army, he studied very well, and finished ten-year school with distinction, and he hasn't
any documents, how can we get him into (this) college?
Moment, moment.
Er, so, I did not know where to go, because, back when I was in partisans I sent a letter to my
village and I got an answer that everyone I knew was killed, so I first came back to the village
and then I knew that in, er, in Kherson, in Zaporozhe, there were second brothers of, er, of my
father, on the mother's side, and then, er, I came there I knew the address, I came to them, they
liked my father very much, and, er, at first, they wanted me to become teacher, because I had ten
grades of education, with excellent education, er, and then I decided I would do private lessons,
and then to enter institute, or university, to get higher education, but I had no documents, not
any documents, that I finished ten grades or anything, so that brother went to rector, and asked
what to do and how, because this is the guy and he has no documents.
And
But, and to the rector, or what?
I went to Kalinindorf, again, and there at school the teachers were my former students, er, fellow-students,
and they, I say, well, they wrote such a document that, they didn't have copies of diplomas there, but
the teachers confirm that he really finished there in, er, '39, I think, finished ten-year school, well,
with distinction, and signed. And by this document I got into the college. Well, already the first grade
I immediately finished with distinction, the first semester. In this college all the time my picture
hung as (one of) the best students, well, and on the whole I was a very good mathematician, right. Well,
and I graduated from the college with distinction, as well.
So I had no documents and I had to go back to, to my village and at school there worked my former
classmates. Of course they did not have any documents, but they made a letter, saying that I
graduated together with them in 1939, was it, and they signed that letter, and using that letter
I got to the university. I was studying with honours, I was a very good mathematician and my
picture was on the award desk all the time and thus I finished university.
Er, I already studied in college, (when) I received a letter from a girl from our village, well,
who was studying one grade below mine. I was in tenth class, she was in the ninth. But she was
studying in a Ukrainian school. Er, in [?березноватой?] like that, it was called.
Well. Her father was working at the oil factory I don't know, he was a specialist. Well. She
was studying in Kharkov when the war began. And when our district was occupied she dropped college
and went to the Donbass, there in the Donbass lived an uncle of hers she had, a brother of her
mother. And with this uncle she was evacuated to Uzbekistan.
M-m.
Speak.
So when I was already in the university I received a letter from a girl, er, whom I knew she was studying
at school, she was one year younger than me, er, but she was studying in a Ukrainian school, and when
the war began, er, she was studying in Kharkiv, er, then she left university and went to Donbass, where
her uncle was, and after they were both evacuated. So I received a letter from her.
So, well, after the first grade I came, they had already returned from evacuation, and they lived again
in the Donbass. All her parents, her parents and relatives had perished as well, she was also lonely,
well, she was only with this uncle of hers, well, I went to her, right, and we married, and er, lived
together, more than fifty years. She died in, '03, in '04, in '04, in 2004 she died.
So she was also, er, lonely and after the first year in the university they returned from evacuation
and went to her, er, we got married, we lived together over fifty years happily, she died in 2004.
He says he was lonely. Er
She was also very lonely.
Ja, but
Because every, all her relatives were killed, and
Sure, but he says he was lonely. Did he think of Sobibor, did he have nightmares of that period?
M-m.
He had a special past, er
M-m, you said that you were lonely then, you felt lonely, were left alone. But
did you have any (specific) thoughts about Sobibor at that time, perhaps you had
certain bad dreams, or didn't you have, or didn't you think about it?
Well, about Sobibor, er, I had experiences during wartime, a lot. Er, in Sobibor I
was a month in all, of course that was a huge experience, in Sobibor, but this was,
er, one out of (many) wartime experiences, I didn’t exactly single it out.
M-m. I had many impressions during the war, and I was only one month
in Sobibor, it was of course a very big impression but I did not single
it out from many other impressions I got during the wartime.
Are there impressions which are as dreadful as Sobibor?
But, were there, well, specific memories or events that
were as dreadful as Sobibor during the war for you?
Well, so, I was on the first, when in the hospital for prisoners of war, in the hospital for prisoners
of war the deputy head of the hospital appeared to be a Jew. And after that they did a full check
for Jewry in the hospital. Already then I was, er, I had a leg broken in two places, well, er, this
had already grown together with me, I even worked as an orderly in this hospital. And some seventy
people of us were revealed as Jews, and, er, more than half of the staff, er, of doctors and medical
attendants appeared to be Jews. And we were put, this hospital was situated near a forest camp, as
it was called, but (we were put) in an evacuation camp, er, from which the prisoners of war were sent
to Germany. Well. And they put us all in a cell, an underground cell. And it was so narrow, we would
turn to the other side on command. Well. They would give hundred, hundred and fifty grams of bread
once and on top of that balanda every other day. Well, balanda it was called, this brownish thingy.
Soup with a couple of potatoes, there would float some. Well. And we were told that there was a note
by Molotov that the Germans are killing our prisoners of war. If this will continue, I say, er, we
will act likewise, he says, with Germans. And, well, therefore, they say, we are not going to shoot
you, but you will die here of hunger. Slowly.
Moment.
Er, so, back when I was in hospital for prisoners of war, er, I remember it only turned out that the
deputy head of that hospital was Jewish. And then the Germans made an inspection for Jewishness. And
it turned out that there were, er, about seventy people who were Jewish and many of them were doctors.
At that time I was wounded, my leg was broken in two places but by that time I was well, so they took
us all and they put us in, er. There was a camp, a forest camp, er, and it had a carcer,
we were all put there under the ground, it was very, small space, we had to turn all together if
we were to turn, we were given very little food, some porridge and a bit of bread and we were told
that there was a note by Molotov that the Germans are killing our Soviet prisoners of war, and if
they don't stop it, Soviets will start killing German prisoners of war. So they were told that they
are not executed because of that note and now they would be left to die of hunger.
And how long did you stay there?
How long were you kept in that cell?
And there, there we stayed, when already less than half of us was left suddenly we were led
out and lined up and sent somewhere. It appeared, we were brought to Minsk to the camp, this
one, and well we were deported, to this Minsk concentration camp. There was, er, a camp for
Jewish prisoners of war. Well, by that time still there were also non-Jews as well. But then,
then they were deported, the final period there were only, only Jews in this camp.
And when
Well, there I was so thin, well, like, see, you have in pictures, see, in pictures, on the whole I
was young-looking, like a young, well, er, and I didn't swell up, and so thin, like, er, legs like
sticks. Right, and this way I provoked such compassion in people, and this Blatman, who assigned the
jobs, sent me into this [?себерсау?], [?семфаустский?] court, there worked a lot
of German Jews. And I was transferred to there, and I was sent to this boiler-house, I didn't work,
and the German Jews there, er, would take something out and give it to me, I got alive a little, and
er, then I was already sent to other jobs. Well, and I, er, had become more, er, strong, er, at that
point, when we were deported to Sobibor I was full, a fully healthy person.
Moment.
Er, so when less than half of us remained, we were all taken to, er, Minsk camp, at first there
were not only Jews, but later only Jews, and I was thin like the pictures you can see from the
war, my legs were like sticks. And, er, the Blatman guy who was, er, selecting for jobs, he sent
me to some court where German Jews were working, and they were very sympathetic with me, I would
be brought there, then sent to a boiler and I did not work there, I rested and sometimes they
gave me some food and that's the way I recovered, er, to, to the point when we were all sent to
Sobibor I was more or less recovered from, from that carcer, incarceration.
That must have been a horrible experience.
This was probably a very hard memory, of course.
Well, goo
This cell.
What, there were quite a lot of cases, well, yet another case I
had, also there. When I worked, the head would say, there were
00:40:00]
four of us, four together, we, er, lived together, four people, so well, I, this, er, Zyamka worked
at the gendarmerie, there was such a commando, we and Fimka worked at, how was it called, the commando
for something, I forgot, in short, we worked with the stove-repairer. And there was another group
of ours working (at the) power-saw bench. We sawed wood, and chopped. But there was another commando,
Truppenwirtschaftslager, this was the most prestigious one with us, there worked dockers, and they
in point of fact fed the whole camp, 'cause they brought in, well, food-stuffs like potatoes, and
gave them away and particularly to those who were in need of them, well, this is so. So you see,
this group, there were healthy guys, good-lookers were they, and they linked with one Ukrainian,
and they agreed there, I say, at the arms depot, they stole weapons, and they agreed with him that
he would bring them somewhere as if to work and they would run away
Moment.
to the partisans.
Er, so on another case, he remembered, yesterday I told you that there were four of us living together
in one room, and we had different groups at that camp, er, some were into the gendarmerie, some
on the woods, er, some were loaders and they who were giving food practically to everyone because
they had a chance to steal, er, so I remember that the loaders, they got connected to some Ukrainian,
er, they stole weapons from, er, a storage, and so he had to bring them somewhere as if to work,
and then they had to escape, they wanted to escape. In this way.
Er, yes.
You told, er, in which group, commando I was?
Yes, yes, yes.
So, well, this Polizei betrayed them, and when they were loading the weapons they were
encircled, and there, straight on the spot, all were shot. And apart from that, whoever
was in the court at that time, from other, er, commandos, was also shot.
And this Zyamka for some or another reason happened to be in the court and he was shot. But we were
working at the power-saw bench. So, this power-saw bench was in the court. We were with seven people.
But Fimka worked at the stove-repairer's, he cooked potatoes and called me, er, sent for me to come.
I went during the break, I went to him to eat. But the other six people straight there were already
shot. And a German came there, where I was, and at this stove-repairer's, Aren't there any strangers
here with you? He looked at him, No! That was all, and they didn't touch me.
M-m.
And then with us, well, these others were brought into the camp, well, but all others were shot.
Moment.
So, they were, er, for he was in that room, but when, as the story goes, that police
guy, Ukrainian, he betrayed them and at a some point in a court they were all, er
Shot.
they were all taken by the Germans and shot, but also every one who was in that court at that point
from all other brigades, it did not matter, they were also shot. And the matter is that one of our
four guys was shot, there, and at that time I was working at the sawery, er, cutting wood, and there
were seven of us working also near that court. During the break, er, one of our colleagues who were
was working together with that at the other guy, he told me that I can come because he made some
potatoes. And so during the break I went to him and the rest six people were executed at the same
point. And the Germans went to that premises where I was, my friend who called me and that guy who
worked with the ovens, he asked if there is anyone strange in, er, not belonging to this group,
and the head of us said, No, everyone here is, er, belongs here. And that's how I survived that
part. And after we were all sent to the concentration camp.
I understand.
Well, who also ? they appeared to be.
He was inch away from death.
Yes. You were lucky.
You were very lucky there.
Enough! Enough with (those) coincidences!
Is that enough with the stories!
[laughs]
I wanted to come back, if he allows me, to after the war was finished. Did he also go
to look for his friends, er, Pechersky and the other guys with whom he escaped?
M-m. If possible, we will now go back to the moment when the war was over, see, when it was
over, did you try to find Sasha and other people with whom you escaped from the camp then?
[coughs] I want, er, tell you a little bit more. I was lucky somehow, during the period of captivity
and er, well, in these concentration camps. It did not happen even once that I was beaten up. There were
? something, twenty-five there, what's that, in particular. Well, but me they somehow didn't ever (beat
up), (perhaps it was) I had such looks, non, er, non-opposing. Well, somehow I was lucky, I would almost
say. Well, right, this (is how it is). I say I haven't sought no one, but only Sasha found me as the
first. Sasha, er, he had my address at the colony, and he wrote to this, er, our village, that he is
searching for, in short, Arkadii Weisspapier. Well. And from there they wrote to me to that college in
Zaporozhe that you are being searched for from, er, Rostov by, er, Alexander Pechersky. Here is his address.
I wrote to him that I'm alive, so, well, the first he found was me.
M-m
So back in the wartime I want to mention that it seems I was very lucky, because I was never beaten
up during the wartime, many people were, and I wasn't. Maybe I had some special looks or something
but anyway I was very, very happy, and very lucky not to be beaten up. And coming to your question,
I was not looking for anyone but, er, Sasha found me first, because he wrote a letter to my village,
he had the address of my village, where I used to live before the war, and from that village they
sent a letter to the institute, in Zaporozhe, saying that, er, from Rostov, Alexander Pechersky
is looking for you, and there was an address, and that's in this way I was the first whom he found,
'cause I responded to the letter and we got in touch.
And you married. Can you talk about the years that followed? Er, yes?
M-m. But well, when you married, er, can you tell a little bit about those years, well,
after the wedding, after the wedding, what happened, well, after you got married?
Which wedding? There was no wedding at all [laughs], we got married and, well, that was it.
And she worked as a teacher, well, she ? me, she helped me. She didn't earn very much, well,
right, er, during the years, during the semester she would dry rusks and I would take (those)
rusks with me, er, when I was going to the first lecture, er, to study. Well, right. A little
bit, in summer, in summer I would be at her uncle's, there we would eat well, of course, but
hard it was, of course. Right, but then I got work and we lived not bad.
M. Er, so we had no special ceremony of course, er, but when we got married she helped
me much, for example, er, she dried bread, and I would take that dried bread with me
when I went to studies in Zaporozhe, and then in summer, er, I spent the summer in Donbass
at her uncle's place, and we had some food there, she was working as a teacher, she did
not earn much, but still she helped me somehow, and after I graduated at the university
I started to work myself and, well, we lived more or less well.
When did he come to Kiev?
When did you come to Kiev?
To Kiev I came already for my son. I say, I worked well in this [coughs], er, at first, well
? When, I say, I finished college, I first worked in Lugansk, I worked as a shop foreman, and
then, when Khrushchev came, they sent, er, all young specialists to the countryside.
M-m.
I was everywhere and always getting in all [laughs] (such) events [laughs], and,
in short, I was sent to Bryansk province, I worked as a deputy shop foreman in
an MTS (Machine and Tractor Station), well I worked there for three years.
But then I left, I worked in Artyomovsk at a factory, as head of the
technical department. You tell, or afterwards you'll forget.
M-m. Good, thanks. Er, to Kiev I already came to my son. Because when I graduated university I first
worked in Lugansk, er, at a power plant, as head of the workers' union. Then, er, I, when Khrushchev
came, they were all kind of events, and to all of these events I was taken, and I went to villages
in Bryansk region, and then, er, back I worked in Artyomovsk, on another plant.
Did he, er, was he bothered by Soviet anti-Semitism?
Did you somehow feel Soviet anti-Semitism yourself?
sighs I have to tell you about one fact in my life that I didn't want to touch on. There's been a very
dreadful thing in my life. In 1938 my father was repressed. He was alleged to have been a Zionist in
1920. And he, apparently, er, I got a letter that he was convicted to ten years, but well, he was shot.
So apart from, er, being a Jew I was also the son of an enemy of the people. Say it.
So, er, I will have to tell you something about my life that I did not intend to tell, first,
er, in 1938 my father was repressed. He was falsely accused of being a Zionist somewhere back
in the twenties. And I was told that he got ten years of imprisonment but he was in fact executed.
So I was first of all a Jew and secondly son of a repressed person. I said it.
Go on.
And so, I [coughs] worked at the Artyomovsk factory as head of the technical department, then I
was deputy chief technology officer of the factory, and then, when our factory director was elected
[coughs], er, president of the City Executive Board, I was acting director. But I could not be
appointed director, because I was, well, er, a son of. Er, they already wanted to confirm my position
as director, but they kept saying, you had to join the party. I said that, er, I had a father who
was repressed and that they wouldn't take me. “Hand in your application and they will take you.”
Well, I handed in the application and was taken as a candidate
and then, when I should already have been confirmed as, er, party member [coughs], well, I thought, er,
in short, I was taken into the party at the meeting, but the regional committee did not confirm.
M-m.
And so I was excluded from, er, the candidates. Well, they said, you keep working
as chief technology officer. Then I decided on the spot to leave this factory.
M-m.
Moment.
So, when I was working in Artyomovsk, I was first of all head of technical department, and then
main engineer. And then at some point our director was elected to the administration, and I
had to fulfil the position of deputy director. And at some point I could have been made the
director of that industry, er, but for that I had to be party member. And I said that my father
was repressed and they would not take me to the party. And the administration replied that you
fill in the form and apply for it, they should. So I filled out the form, they took me as a
candidate to the party, and then the local party meeting, er, joined me to the party. But the
regional one declined, and I was excluded from the candidates to the party, and they told me
you're working as a main engineer and you should be staying working as a main engineer. And
after that I decided to quit the job and go away from that industry.
Well sniffs I had a good acquaintance working in our technical department, er, an engineer. His
father worked in Donetsk in, er, how was it called then, well, the holding administration ]
M-m.
in a People's Holding Council.
Well. And he took me to Donetsk, er, as head of transport management. And I don't
know, in short, I was transferred to Donetsk, they made me head of management.
M-m. So ]
Well, there I also was immediately given a good flat, well, a nice one, all right. We lived
fine, financially, and both my sons studied there. This was the last job I had.
Mm. So, then I knew one of the engineers, who had relatives in Donetsk in Sovnarkhoz,
so called the, er, also another employment. And he, I was transferred there, as head
of transport department, and I was given a good apartment and it was good salary,
and that's the place where I stayed, and where I worked, till, well, er. That was
my last working place and my both sons studied there too in that city.
Did he ever talk about the war?
When?
After that ]
Mm.
Did he have chance to talk about the war, or ]
About the war ]
Yeah.
Mm. Er, did you, well, afterwards, often talk about the war?
Well, with whom? I just didn't try to tell it ? to anyone. Later there were these correspondents, er,
I would tell everything, but, er, er, the way I told you just now I never told to anyone [laughs].
Er, I was not very much willing to talk, of course, if some
journalists came and asked I would be telling something.
Now already, I'm saying to Olga, before my death [laughs].
Er, I haven't been telling that of course to anyone like I do
now to you, and it's now like before death I'm speaking.
time, I didn't tell about my father, no, I didn't. And I didn't write it down
in documents, after the war, I studied and, er, got a job, and no, er. But later,
already when this rehabilitation began, then I only applied, er, for my father
to be rehabilitated. Well. Right, and I got this rehabilitation.
Moment.
For a very long time I did not talk about the fact that my father was repressed,
and only while I got the university, I got the job and I was not mentioning it
anywhere, or writing it in any documents, but only when rehabilitation began I
wrote, asking for rehabilitation of my father and I got that paper.
I understand very well.
She understands you well, what you
But he, but he lived in a country which was very anti-Zionist, anti-Semitic, it was the same.
M-m.
Did, well, can he talk about that?
She understands well what you mean, well, you lived in a country that was,
well, anti-Zionist, anti-Semitic, but how did you experience that?
I'll tell you, me and my children, I think we didn't feel any oppressions.
А, I tell you I think that me or my children did not feel
any pressure, did not feel any oppression on that.
I think so, er. True, my eldest son as a doctor, my youngest as an engineer well, er,
they're very talented, my Vadik, and he as a businessman as well, (he's) very successful,
right. And he already got us, me and (his) mother right here, in Kiev, in Kiev, completely.
All okay, we sold our flat in Donetsk and I bought, er, us a flat here. And we're all
here, in Kiev, well, yes, I don't remember in which year I came here.
So and my both sons are also very talented, the older one is er, a doctor, er, and the younger
one is an engineer, and he is also very talented, er, as an engineer, as a businessman, and
then he brought me here together with my wife and, and that's how we moved to Kiev.
Mm.
Did you keep the contact going with Sasha? And did you meet the others?
Er, did you maintain some sort of contact with Sasha and did you meet with someone else from, er?
Constantly, we, met very often, very often. Either at Sasha's, at first, er, he found
me first. But then he found this, er, Semyon Rosenfeld, he found, er, Pechersky]
and it's true, er, I received a letter from, er, Sasha, that, well, yet another man
from Sobibor has appeared. True, (he) didn't know that (he was one of) the group,
well, er, Semyon Rosenfeld. Do you know him? I don't know such a one. And, well,
later he told that, er, he sort of even participated in this uprising.
M-m, m-m.
Well.
So we did keep in touch, first Sasha found me, and then, er
Semyon.
er, there was this Semyon Rosenfeld, who found Sasha, and Sasha wrote me, do you know him, because
he was not from our group, and so Sasha wrote me if I knew him, but I didn't, though it turned out
that he was there and maybe he also took part in the uprising but we did not meet before.
I went to visit him, tell him.
M-m. She's seen Semyon.
Yes. Well. And then this, er, Wajtsen was found. Well.
I-I visited him also.
M-m. She's also seen him.
Yes. Then there was, er, not Tsyn, Tsybulsky, but that
Plotnitsky. Plotnitsky.
Oh, oh.
Plotnitsky, yes, Vadim, Vadim is suggesting.
Old age.
Plotnitsky, isn't it?
What?
V-Vadim is suggesting, Plotnitsky.
Plotnitsky, yes. Plotnitsky. Right, er, this, er, [?Форталераф?] and ? must look
her Well, in short, we began, I say, like [coughs] every five years, then, I say, they meet.
Now at Sasha's, now at my place, now at Rosenfeld's, well, and so we would meet.
We started to meet every five years, either at my place or at Sasha's place or at Rozenfeld's place.
One time, er, one time, er, we were with nine people.
At some point there were even nine of us. At meetings.
Er, of these former prisoners.
The former inmates.
Well. And then they started to die, one died, another died, and when Sasha had died already,
then, er, we would already meet rarely. We also met two times in, er, Israel. My sons were
already organizers of that happening. We travelled with our sons to, er, Sobibor.
very softly [?]
Er, well, in short, we looked at this, er, there, how it's called, er, well, how
She knows, she's also been (there).
Yes, we looked at these, er
Museum.
So we started to meet every five years but then people started to die because of age and then when Sasha
died we almost did not meet but then twice we've met in Israel and already my sons were organizers of
that meeting, and once, when we went to Sobibor, and met in that museum to see the museum.
Yes, I hope he will come at the birthday of Simkha, Simkha will be one hundred.
O.
We hope that you will celebrate Simkha's birthday, he'll be hundred this year.
Er, wh(at)?
To Simkha.
Aaa, yes.
I have promised to come.
[laughs] She promised to come to him for his birthday [laughs].
We should celebrate
Perhaps.
if somebody gets that age.
(We) must, must celebrate a hundred years.
My eldest son has quite a lot of pictures of our meetings.
My elder son has many pictures of our meetings.
Yes.
[?]
If you'll ask him to bring them and you'll look at these pictures,
let's say, which of them you would be interested to copy?
You can ask him to, to see the pictures and maybe to copy some of them if you need.
Yes. Er, I have promised not to stay too long, so, er, there's some
questions I still would like to ask but I have to keep my promise.
Er, we promised that we won't weary you very long today, of course there still
are some questions, but nevertheless we don't want you to get tired if us.
Why
Well, no problem.
why has he never told the story of his father before, because it's nothing to be ashamed of?
Before when?
Before now, clearly.
M-m. But why, well, didn't you talk up to now about the story with your father?
I didn't want this, didn't want this, this (is) completely different, er, this here
is not related to Sobibor, I just didn't want, er, to touch on this issue.
I just didn't want to touch this question, it's nothing
to do with Sobibor, so I did not want to touch it.
But it's your story.
This is how it turns out. Er, there are many, many, er, (who) want to show off
how they suffered from Soviet power, well, er and, therefore I didn't like to,
er, show myself, that I, er, suffered heavily from Soviet power, er?
M-mm.
Isn't it that way? I didn't want that.
Many people are also trying to show how they suffered from the Soviet authorities and
I did not want to show that I suffered in any way from the Soviet authorities.
But it's part of the story of Weisspapier.
M-m. But this is a very important part of the story of Weisspapier!
Yes.
And I'm interested in Weisspapier.
M-m, and she's very much interested in Weisspapier.
Yes.
Er, what does Sobibor mean in your life? sighs What is the lesson
you learned from it? Is there anything you learned from life?
Er, well, which place does Sobibor take, well, in your life, is there perhaps some kind of lesson that
you learned from this, some kind of conclusion that you drew for yourself after these events?
I can't answer this question.
I cannot answer this question.
No? It's okay.
Well, sorry, er, of course, of course this has formed my conscience. It was an offense,
an offense, that we, we're a talented people, and all of a sudden to organize such
a machine of destruction, this is, this doesn't sink in, we, what, a conveyor belt
of destruction! This should, er, should it be like that? What, what for?
M-m.
What I still have, of course it's a huge offense.
Of course, er, it formed my views and it's very painful that, er, we could do that, to
organize such a machine of killing, and, what for? That's why it's very painful.
I understand.
She understands you.
I understand. Is there anything you would like to add? I am here
because of the trial of Demjanjuk, maybe you want to say
M-m.
something about that or maybe you want to add something.
Er, perhaps you would like to add something yet, in principle she's here also be, because
of the Demjanjuk trial, perhaps you want to say something about this, but perhaps also
Say, everything.
something about something else.
I've said, say, everything.
It seems, it seems.
What I had to and what I didn't have to tell.
What I had to and what I didn't have to [laughs].
[laughs].
Thank you very much.
Thank you.